FIFA World Cup: Refereeing chief denies bias claims in Argentina-Egypt game | World Cup 2026 News | Al Jazeera
Skip links
Skip to Content
play
Live
Sign up
Show navigation menu
Navigation menu
News
Show more news sections
Africa
Asia
US & Canada
Latin America
Europe
Asia Pacific
Middle East
Explained
Sport
Opinion
Video
More
Show more sections
Features
Economy
Human Rights
Climate Crisis
Investigations
Interactives
In Pictures
Science & Technology
Podcasts
Travel
Sponsored Content
play
Live
Click here to search
search
Sign up
Navigation menu
caret-left
World Cup 2026
Match Schedule
Knockout Bracket
Group Standings
caret-right
Sport
|
World Cup 2026
FIFA World Cup: Refereeing chief denies bias claims in Argentina-Egypt game
Pierluigi Collina said that such allegations of bias could provoke threats against referees and their families.
Listen
Listen (3 mins)
Save
Click here to share on social media
share-nodes
Share
facebook
x
whatsapp-stroke
copylink
google
Add Al Jazeera on Google
info
Egypt coach Hossam Hassan is shown a yellow card by referee Francois Letexier [Paul Childs/Reuters]
By
Al Jazeera Staff
and
Reuters
Published On 9 Jul 2026
9 Jul 2026
FIFA refereeing chief ‌Pierluigi Collina has defended the officiating in
Argentina’s dramatic 3-2 victory over Egypt
in the
World ⁠Cup
round of ⁠16, dismissing allegations of bias and saying match officials operated with complete independence.
In an
interview
published on FIFA’s website on Thursday, Collina said criticism of referees was part ⁠of football, but he condemned the
questioning of the officials’ integrity
after Egypt complained about the
officiating
following the defeat.
Recommended Stories
list of 4 items
list 1 of 4
Do fans still trust referees and VAR at the World Cup?
list 2 of 4
Argentina fans accused of violence, racism by Egypt, Cape Verde supporters
list 3 of 4
Justin Bieber joins Madonna, Shakira, BTS in World Cup final halftime show
list 4 of 4
Mbappe and France kick off World Cup quarterfinals with Morocco clash
end of list
“With such a high number of matches played in a relatively short period of time, it is normal that some things do not go as expected,” Collina said. “When that happens, they [referees] are ready to work even harder to ensure they are fully prepared for the next match.
“Of course, constructive discussion about decisions will always be part of football, but unfounded allegations have no place in our sport.”
Collina said that such allegations could provoke threats against referees and their families.
“Nobody can question the integrity of the FIFA World Cup match officials … Equally, nobody can claim that FIFA refereeing can be influenced by anyone, not even by the FIFA president [Gianni Infantino],” he added.
“Match officials make honest decisions and, just like players and coaches, they always try to do their best.”
French referee Francois Letexier speaks with Egypt forward Mohamed Salah during the 2026 World Cup round of 16 football match between Argentina and Egypt at Atlanta Stadium [Roberto Schmidt/AFP]
Egypt exited ‌the tournament but claimed they had been treated unfairly, after Argentina overturned a 2-0 deficit with 11 minutes remaining to snatch victory with a stoppage-time winner from Enzo Fernandez.
Advertisement
Coach Hossam Hassan alleged after the match that there
may have been pressure on the referee
to keep Argentina in the tournament, and that Egypt were “cheated” out of a place in the quarterfinals.
The Egyptian Football Association also criticised the refereeing decisions, saying it would not remain silent over what it described as the improper use of the Video Assistant Referee (VAR) system.
Egypt ⁠argued that Mostafa Zico’s second-half strike was incorrectly ruled out for what ⁠it described as a non-existent foul in the build-up. Egypt were also incensed that a challenge on Mohamed Salah was not penalised moments before Argentina launched the move that produced the winning goal.
Egypt’s head coach Hossam Hassan speaks with French referee Francois Letexier during the 2026 World Cup round of 16 football match between Argentina and Egypt [Roberto Schmidt/AFP]
FIFA’s Collina said VAR had correctly ⁠recommended overturning Zico’s goal, after identifying a foul by Marwan Attia on Argentina defender Lisandro Martinez during the attacking possession phase.
“We believe that a ⁠foul is a foul,” Collina said. “Regardless of whether the foul ⁠appears ‘obvious’, if the referee did not see it on the field of play, the VAR can intervene.”
Collina also defended the decision not to award Egypt a penalty before Argentina’s winner, saying both the referee and VAR judged the contact between ‌Salah and Julian Alvarez to be “normal football contact”.
“Stepping on an opponent’s foot is a foul, whereas a defender who touches the ball first and then makes normal football contact has not ‌committed ‌a foul,” he said.
While acknowledging that some decisions would always involve an
element of subjectivity
, Collina said FIFA was satisfied with how VAR principles had been applied throughout the tournament.
aj-logo
aj-logo
aj-logo
Advertisement
About
About
Show more
About Us
Code of Ethics
Terms and Conditions
EU/EEA Regulatory Notice
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Cookie Preferences
Accessibility Statement
Sitemap
Work for us
Connect
Connect
Show more
Contact Us
User Accounts Help
Advertise with us
Stay Connected
Newsletters
Channel Finder
TV Schedule
Podcasts
Submit a Tip
Paid Partner Content
Our Channels
Our Channels
Show more
Al Jazeera Arabic
Al Jazeera English
Al Jazeera Investigative Unit
Al Jazeera Mubasher
Al Jazeera Documentary
Al Jazeera Balkans
AJ+
Our Network
Our Network
Show more
Al Jazeera Centre for Studies
Al Jazeera Media Institute
Learn Arabic
Al Jazeera Centre for Public Liberties & Human Rights
Al Jazeera Forum
Al Jazeera Hotel Partners
Follow Al Jazeera English:
facebook
twitter
youtube
instagram-colored-outline
rss
© 2026 Al Jazeera Media Network