How Spain won the World Cup and why Lionel Messi’s Argentina finished up furious - The Athletic
Tyson Fury Wins Fight
Greatest World Cup Final Ever
Premier League
2026 Men's World Cup
Tennis
Formula 1
NFL
NBA
NHL
Golf
Cycling
Global Sports
Champions League
Championship
La Liga
FA Cup
Cricket
Europa League
Women's Football
Olympics
Sailing
Sports Business
Boxing
Serie A
Bundesliga
International Football
MLB
MLS
FPL
League Cup
League One
League Two
Women's Euros
NWSL
College Sports
NCAAF
NCAAM
Peak
MMA
Motorsports
NASCAR
Culture
Memorabilia & Collectibles
Gaming
Sports Betting
World Cup's Best PL Club
Morgan Rogers vs. Elliot Anderson
Great Britain SailGP
Soccer Connections
Log In
Subscribe Now
Tickets by Viagogo
Play Center
REGION
U.S.
International
Search
Top News
Podcasts
World Cup
Bracket
Schedule
Live Results
Teams
Newsletter
Pick'em
Fantasy
Greatest World Cup Final of All-Time
Watch: The Athletic FC
Watch: The Athletic FC Daily Cup
Watch: The Totally Football Show
Play Soccer Connections
FIFA World
Cup 2026
Team Of The Tournament
Spain Are Worthy Champions
Remarkable Pictures
Mbappe Golden Boot Winner
Norwegian FA Plan Complaint
Betting Irregularities
Rodri lifts the World Cup
(Alex Pantling - FIFA/FIFA via Getty Images)
Analysis
How Spain won the World Cup and why Lionel Messi’s Argentina finished up furious
By
Tim Spiers
,
Jack Lang
,
Conor O'Neill
,
Dermot Corrigan
and
Graham Scott
July 19, 2026
Updated July 20, 2026
Share article
1.2K
Spain won their first World Cup in extra time in 2010 and they did the same on Sunday against Argentina to become world champions for a second time.
The substitute Ferran Torres was Spain’s hero, shooting past Emiliano Martinez in the 106th minute of the game to break Argentina hearts and stop Lionel Messi and his team from winning back-to-back World Cups.
Advertisement
The 39-year-old Messi had his quietest game of the tournament, with just a single touch in the opening 15 minutes — and that was from the kick-off. Argentina didn’t have a shot in the first half and struggled to test Spain, who were the better team throughout but failed to find a breakthrough until Torres finished off an excellent move.
The stop-start nature of the game was not helped by a 27-minute half-time show featuring Madonna, BTS, Justin Bieber and Shakira, among many, many others.
Argentina were already second-best in the game when, as proceedings were heading for extra time, they had Enzo Fernandez sent off for a second yellow card after he sent the young Spain defender Pau Cubarsi catapulting into the sky at MetLife Stadium in New York, New Jersey.
And with a player advantage in the 30 extra minutes, Spain began to exert even greater control, and after having one goal ruled out for a soft foul on the Argentina centre-back Nicolas Otamendi, Torres’ goal was enough to win the World Cup.
Jack Lang, Tim Spiers, Dermot Corrigan, Conor O'Neill and Graham Scott analyse the key talking points...
The moment Spain won it
Spain kept pushing, probing, attacking and asking incessant questions of the Argentina rearguard.
It was one-way traffic when Argentina had 11 players, let alone when they had 10, but as Argentina kept fouling, spoiling and slowing the game, penalties seemed inevitable.
Then, finally, in the 106th minute and with their 20th shot, Spain broke through.
As was the case in their quarter-final victory over Belgium and their semi-final win against France, Pedro Porro played a pivotal role, with his deep cross finding Nico Williams at the back stick, with the Athletic Club forward arching his neck to direct a perfect header back into the path of Torres, who lashed his shot past a despairing Martinez dive.
(Jewel SAMAD / AFP via Getty Images)
Their pressure had finally told and, given how they improved as the tournament went on, played as a complete team, knocked out the free-scoring favourites France and then overcame and didn't stoop to Argentina's rough-house tactics, Spain deserved it.
Advertisement
They had the best defence, conceding just one goal all tournament. They had a clearly defined, consistent playing style that didn't lean heavily on their star player Lamine Yamal. And, like when they last won it in 2010, they dominated the final against aggressive opponents and scored the winner in extra time.
Tim Spiers
President Donald Trump booed at World Cup final | World Cup Daily Briefing
Megan Feringa and Laura Williamson
A bleak ending to Messi's World Cup career?
There was a moment, in the dying embers of regular time, when Messi sprang to life. He had spent most of the preceding 90 minutes in glorious isolation, watching from afar as Spain passed the Argentina defence into a state of hypnosis. He had barely touched the ball, let alone managed to weave the usual magic with it. But a player of Messi's class never stays quiet for long.
And so, just after Fernandez's red card, he dug deep... and grassed Marc Cucurella up for speaking to him with his hand over his mouth. The referee was not moved.
Messi has put in some of the great World Cup performances. A few of them have come this summer. This was not even within a million miles of being one of them. This is a vanishingly rare thing to say about Messi — something that feels close to sacrilegious — but he simply did not influence this match. His one shot of note came deep into extra time and was blocked before it tested the Spain goalkeeper Unai Simon.
Daily Play
Play Connections: Soccer Edition
Group soccer terms that share a common thread. A new puzzle is available each day.
There is a bit to unpack here. In so many matches, Messi has dragged Argentina out of holes. Sometimes it has seemed like their entire system is just giving the ball to him. When you have the best player ever, that makes a kind of sense. Here, though, it was not enough. Messi was well marshalled. And Argentina had nothing else.
It will go down as a bleak, unfitting ending. It also carried a few resonances. A decade ago, Messi walked out of the MetLife Stadium convinced he’d played his final international game, Argentina having lost the 2016 Copa America final to Chile. "It's over," he said after that match. He was not, at that point, universally loved in his homeland.
Advertisement
It wasn't over. Messi's second act has been magnificent. It has yielded a World Cup and two Copa America titles. It has cemented his legacy, especially at home. He was hoping, in New Jersey, for the perfect finale.
But for once, fate did not smile on Argentina's talisman.
Jack Lang
What happened after the full-time whistle?
There were ugly scenes after the final whistle as scuffles broke out between Argentina and Spain players.
As the Spain players rushed on to the pitch in celebration, Nahuel Molina appeared to try and catch the substituted Rodri with his hand as he ran past. The Manchester City midfielder went to confront Molina, who squared up to him, before Spain's Eric Garcia pushed the defender away.
An argument then developed between Garcia and Leandro Paredes, who pushed the Barcelona defender in the throat as Lionel Scaloni attempted to intervene. Thiago Almada seemed to wrestle with Gavi and Paredes then went for the midfielder too, grabbing him by his substitute’s bib and pushing him down.
Paredes was eventually drawn away from the melee, but it was a sorry way for Argentina’s tournament to end.
Tomas Hill Lopez-Menchero
How much did Fernandez's red card cost Argentina?
It took just over 10 minutes for Fernandez to write himself into the history books — for all the wrong reasons.
The Argentina midfielder was first booked for dissent. After being eased off the ball by Rodri in the centre circle, he collapsed to the floor and appealed for a foul. When the referee Slavko Vincic ignored his pleas, he aggressively swung his arms, showing his disgust. Vincic brandished a yellow card.
In added time at the end of 90 minutes. A loose ball landed between Fernandez and Spain defender Cubarsi. The latter was always the favourite for it and got there first. Fernandez should have pulled out but didn't, sending Cubarsi's body tumbling through the air.
(Jewel SAMAD / AFP via Getty Images)
It was beyond brainless from the Chelsea midfielder. It also forced Argentina into a change of shape. Initially, Julian Alvarez dropped even deeper than he had already been playing. Then, as Spain tightened their grip in extra time, Lionel Scaloni threw on an extra defender, leaving Messi alone up front.
Advertisement
From that point, it was penalties or nothing from Argentina. And when Torres scored, Fernandez's idiocy only came into greater focus.
Jack Lang
How did it take until the 41st minute for the referee to show a yellow card?
Referee Slavko Vincic adopted a low-key approach to the World Cup final in the first half, but a decision not to show a yellow card to Alexis Mac Allister could have come back to haunt him.
The Liverpool midfielder’s tackle on the halfway line early in the first half was late, involved both feet and could only be described as reckless. The fourth official had the perfect view, and should have been able to describe what he saw in such terms that Vincic would have shown a card.
Mac Allister clatters into Olmo, who had moved the ball away from the lunging Argentina midfielder (REUTERS/Carlos Barria)
Top referees always want their first yellow to be for an offence that no one can dispute, which sometimes leads to borderline tackles being excused early in the match. But Mac Allister crossed the line in the 15th minute and should have been punished.
Vincic might have regretted his leniency had Mac Allister later committed another yellow-card offence that had a major impact on the game, such as stopping a significant Spain attack.
Argentina’s Nicolas Tagliafico could easily have received a yellow card when he deliberately brought down Spain’s Lamine Yamal. He was saved by the presence nearby of Lisandro Martinez, but the challenge was so unorthodox, clumsy and deliberate that many referees would have cautioned the defender.
The first yellow card was eventually shown to Martinez for a deliberate foul in the 41st minute, which was equally indisputable, as Spain were breaking at pace.
Martinez was booked for flying through the back of Oyarzabal (Kevin C. Cox/Getty Images)
Refereeing finals and other major matches involves striking a careful balance between asserting authority while allowing the players to take centre stage.
No referee wants to reduce a team to 10 players unless it is for an offence that everyone watching would agree left the ref with no choice. Already on a yellow card, Fernandez fulfilled that brief with his wild tackle on Pau Cubarsi. Vincic duly showed him his second yellow and sent him off.
Advertisement
The Chelsea midfielder’s tackle happened at such a pace that Cubarsi was sent spiralling into the air, which made me wonder if Vincic might show a straight red. But a yellow card was the correct call, as Fernandez’s studs were pointing down and the point of contact was low. Fernandez was left to rue the earlier caution he received for a visible show of dissent.
Graham Scott, a former Premier League referee
How did Spain stop Messi — and Argentina?
Shackle Messi, shackle Argentina.
Spain are the first side to keep the tournament’s star player quiet, a feat that nullified the rest of Scaloni’s attack. He took just 15 touches in the first half, his lowest tally across the last three World Cups, with his pass from kick-off his sole contribution in the opening quarter of an hour.
By dominating possession and ferociously hunting it back, Spain smothered Argentina, cutting off the supply line to their talisman. Thierry Henry, speaking on Fox Sports, described what it is like playing against this intense style. “You feel like your head is underwater. You feel like you’re suffocating,” he said.
Aware that Messi, for all his gifts, has lost that explosive yard of pace at 39 years old, Spain pushed their defensive line high, condensing the pitch. When Messi was played through early on, goalkeeper Unai Simon raced off his line, reaching the ball first near the centre circle.
Against this pressure, Messi, as he does, scanned the pitch for dangerous pockets of space, but was cut off each time. Just before the hydration break in the first half, he finally received the ball on the turn in midfield, only for Rodri to barge into him and concede a foul.
(MAURO PIMENTEL / AFP via Getty Images)
Against England and Egypt, Messi had turned the game by drifting out to the right, a tactic he tried again here. Spain were wise to it, quickly doubling up and crowding him out.
Advertisement
But Messi’s lack of influence owed less to his own ineffectiveness than to Spain’s dominance, which starved him of the ball, leaving him to feed off scraps.
Conor O'Neill
Was Rodri the most influential player at the World Cup?
Messi has had the greatest individual impact on this World Cup, especially during those fantastic late comebacks by Argentina. But Spain midfielder Rodri has arguably been the most influential player through the tournament, with his outstanding passing and pressing key to Spain’s semi-final victory against France.
The 30-year-old Manchester City man was easily the central figure of the final. Rodri was everywhere — nipping in cleverly to intercept a dangerous Argentina pass near the halfway line, arriving right on time to provide a passing option to a team-mate in trouble and surging forward to set up a dangerous Spain attack.
It was a scandalously good performance by the 2024 Ballon d’Or winner — with his reading of the game so good that the ball seemed attracted to him. He was not afraid of getting stuck in either — when Messi threatened to break at one point, a neat tug on the Argentina No 10’s shirt stopped any danger.
(REUTERS/Mike Segar)
Moments later in the first half, Rodri was at the centre of a dazzling passing move as Spain pinged the ball forward, with midfield colleagues Dani Olmo and Fabian Ruiz also involved, leading to a half-chance that Mikel Oyarzabal hit too close to Argentina goalkeeper Emiliano Martinez.
Argentina’s players’ aggressive approach continued after the break, with Leandro Paredes booked for a cynical elbow into Rodri’s back. It was a sign they felt they needed to do something to try and interrupt his control of proceedings but, once back to his feet, Rodri continued to direct almost constant, one-way traffic towards the Argentina goal. Messi was barely involved in the play, and Argentina had zero shots on goal with normal time almost over.
Advertisement
Superstar forwards have dominated the headlines at this World Cup, but Rodri — a player who prefers not to have any social media presence — has tactically and technically been its most significant performer.
Dermot Corrigan
Was a 27-minute half-time show really needed?
For the first time in World Cup history, half-time lasted longer than 15 minutes (27 minutes and 23 seconds, to be precise) to allow for an all-singing, all-dancing musical performance — AKA a Super Bowl-style half-time show.
The undoubted star (sponsored by Topps) from a football point of view was an awkward, grinning, goofy Ronaldo Nazario, accompanied by his old Brazil team-mate Ronaldinho, driving a buggy into the stadium with Madonna in the back singing her song Music. Welcome to an American World Cup.
Ronaldinho, Madonna and Ronaldo during the half-time show (REUTERS/Hannah Mckay)
The rest of the show featured South Korean boyband BTS, Shakira, Burna Boy, Ted Lasso, Justin Bieber, The Muppets, the New York Philharmonic Orchestra and the Simon Bolivar Symphony Orchestra of Venezuela (obviously)... and Coldplay, who ended the whole thing with a schmaltzy cacophony of music, colour and the word love.
Was there much to do with football? Well, they did a short bit on the Norwegian row, as performed by their fans and players at this tournament, and an orchestral version of Seven Nation Army, but there were no mentions of Spain's fluent passing game or Kylian Mbappe's excellent tournament goalscoring record.
As a show, fine, it was actually great (apart from the bum Bieber note, a solo acoustic number that went on far too long), extremely well choreographed, slick, fun and entertaining.
But was it worth interrupting the World Cup final for 27 minutes? Absolutely not.
This isn't the Super Bowl. Do it before or after the game next time, please, FIFA.
Tim Spiers
Jul 24, 2026
Connections: Sports Edition
Spot the pattern. Connect the terms
Find the hidden link between sports terms
Play today's puzzle
Tagged To:
Bundesliga
FIFA Men's World Cup
International Football
La Liga
Ligue 1
+ more
National
Boxing
Bundesliga
Champions League
Championship
College Football
College Sports
Copa America
Copa del Rey
Cricket
Culture
Cycling
Europa League
European Championship
FA Cup
Fantasy Baseball
Fantasy Basketball
Fantasy Football
Fantasy Hockey
Fantasy Premier League
FIFA Club World Cup
FIFA Men's World Cup
FIFA Women's World Cup
Formula 1
Gaming
Global Sports
Golf
International Football
La Liga
League Cup
League One
League Two
Ligue 1
Memorabilia & Collectibles
Men's College Basketball
Men's Olympic Ice Hockey
Mixed Martial Arts
MLB
MLS
Motorsports
NASCAR
NBA
NFL
NHL
NWSL
Olympics
Opinion
Peak
Premier League
Sailing
Scottish Premiership
Serie A
Soccer
Sports Betting
Sports Business
Tennis
Top Sports News
WNBA
Women's Champions League
Women's College Basketball
Women's Euros
Women's Hockey
Women's Olympic Ice Hockey
Women's Soccer
Women's Super League
World Baseball Classic
The Athletic Ink
Podcasts
Headlines
US
Arizona
Atlanta
Baltimore
Bay Area
Boston
Buffalo
Carolina
Chicago
Cincinnati
Cleveland
Columbus
Dallas
Denver
Detroit
Houston
Indiana
Jacksonville
Kansas City
Las Vegas
Los Angeles
Memphis
Miami
Minnesota
Nashville
New Orleans
New York
Oklahoma
Oregon
Orlando
Philadelphia
Pittsburgh
Sacramento
San Antonio
San Diego
Seattle
St. Louis
Tampa Bay
Utah
Washington DC
Wisconsin
Canada
Calgary
Edmonton
Montreal
Ottawa
Toronto
Vancouver
Winnipeg
Partners
Collectibles by eBay
Tickets by Viagogo
Play Center
Connections: Sports
Connections: Soccer
Editions
International
U.S.
Subscribe
Start Subscription
Buy a Gift
Group Subscriptions
HQ
About Us
Careers
Code of Conduct
Editorial Guidelines
Advertise
Business Inquiries
Press Inquiries
Support
FAQ
Forgot Password?
Contact Us
Terms of Service
Newsletters
The Pulse
The Bounce
The Windup
Prime Tire
Full Time
Until Saturday
NFL Newsletter
The Athletic FC
MoneyCall
Red Light
Peak
No Offseason
©
2026
The Athletic Media Company,
A New York Times Company
Privacy Policy
Cookie Policy
Support
Sitemap